docs: update spec for timestamping (#290)
notaryproject/notaryproject: specs/trust-store-trust-policy.md

                cert10.pem
        /tsa
            /publicly-trusted-tsa
                tsa-root.pem
```

The Trust store currently supports three kinds of identities, additional identities may be supported in future:

- **Certificates**: The `x509/ca` trust store contains named stores that contain Certificate Authority (CA) root certificates.

> - **SigningAuthority Certificate**: The `x509/signingAuthority` trust store contains named stores that contain Siging Authority's root certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **SigningAuthority Certificate**: The `x509/signingAuthority` trust store contains named stores that contain Signing Authority's root certificates.
```

  An *object* that specifies a predefined verification level, with an option to override the Notary Project trust policy defined verification level if user wants to specify a [custom verification level](#custom-verification-level).
    - **`level`**(*string*): A REQUIRED property that specifies the verification level, supported values are `strict`, `permissive`, `audit` and `skip`. Detailed explanation of each level is present [here](#signatureverification-details).
    - **`override`**(*map of string-string*): This OPTIONAL map is used to specify a [custom verification level](#custom-verification-level).

>   - **`trustStores`**(*array of string*): This REQUIRED property specifies a set of one or more named trust stores, each of which contain the trusted roots against which signatures are verified. Each named trust store uses the format `{trust-store-type}:{named-store}`. Currently supported values for `trust-store-type` are `ca`, `signingAuthority` and `tsa`. When a TSA is used, the format `ca:acme-rockets,tsa:acme-tsa` is supported to specify it.

Reviewer 2: Is `tsa` type of trust store really useful in the trust policy v1.0?

Reviewer 2: TSA certs are never used and cannot be used, aren't they?

  - **`trustedIdentities`**(*array of strings*): This REQUIRED property specifies a set of identities that the user trusts. For X.509 PKI, it supports list of elements/attributes of the signing certificate's subject. For more information, see [identities constraints](#trusted-identities-constraints) section. A value `*` is supported if user trusts any identity (signing certificate) issued by the CA(s) in `trustStore`.

##### Version 2.0

> Version 2.0 adds support of timestamp countersignature verification in addition to version 1.0.

Reviewer: Should we mention other updates?
```suggestion
Version 2.0 adds support for timestamp countersignature verification in addition to version 1.0 It also introduces trust type support for trusted identities and optimizes the format for `trustStores` and `trustedIdentities` fields.
```

  - **`name`**(*string*): This REQUIRED property represents the name of the trust policy.
  - **`registryScopes`**(*array of strings*): This REQUIRED property determines which trust policy is applicable for the given artifact.
    The scope field supports filtering based on fully qualified repository URI `${registry-name}/${namespace}/${repository-name}`.
    For more information, see [trust policy constraints](#oci-trust-policy-constraints) section.
  - **`signatureVerification`**(*object*): This REQUIRED property dictates how signature verification is performed.
  An *object* that specifies a predefined verification level, with an option to override the Notary Project trust policy defined verification level if user wants to specify a [custom verification level](#custom-verification-level).
    - **`level`**(*string*): A REQUIRED property that specifies the verification level, supported values are `strict`, `permissive`, `audit` and `skip`. Detailed explanation of each level is present [here](#signatureverification-details).
    - **`override`**(*map of string-string*): This OPTIONAL map is used to specify a [custom verification level](#custom-verification-level).

>   - **`timestampVerification`**(*object*): This OPTIONAL property dictates how timestamp countersignature verification is performed. If present, it is used solely under the [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509) signing scheme. If not present, default timestamp countersignature verification will be performed. Current supported fields are:

Reviewer 3: Why do we need `timestampVerification` ?
* `level`: Can this be governed by `signatureVerification#level` ?
* `expiryRelaxed`: As per spec, we dont care about expiry of timestamping leaf cert, then why do we need this field?

PS: haven't reviewed whole PR, commenting based on last meeting recording.

Reviewer 2: @priteshbandi suggested in the community meeting that not configuring any tsa trust store iff `level` to be `skip` so that we don’t need to introduce the field `level`.

  - **`trustedIdentities`**(*map of trust-store-type -> array-of-trusted-identities*): REQUIRED map with `trust-store-type` as keys and corresponding `array of trusted identities` as values. Currently supported `trust-store-type` are `ca`, `signingAuthority` and `tsa`. For example, when a CA trusted identity is specified, the format is `"ca": ["x509.subject: C=US, ST=WA, L=Seattle, O=acme-rockets.io, OU=Finance, CN=SecureBuilder"]`. A value `*` is supported if user trusts any identity under a certain `trust-store-type`. For example, `"tsa": ["*"]`. A missing `trust-store-type` or empty array in the map means NO identity is trusted under the particular trust store type.

    For X.509 PKI, it supports list of elements/attributes of the signing certificate's subject. For more information, see [identities constraints](#trusted-identities-constraints) section. 
  

> #### Blob Trust Policy

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to unify the trust policies for both OCI artifacts and blobs?

  An *object* that specifies a predefined verification level, with an option to override the Notary Project trust policy defined verification level if user wants to specify a [custom verification level](#custom-verification-level).
    - **`level`**(*string*): A REQUIRED property that specifies the verification level, supported values are `strict`, `permissive`, `audit` and `skip`. Detailed explanation of each level is present [here](#signatureverification-details).
    - **`override`**(*map of string-string*): This OPTIONAL map is used to specify a [custom verification level](#custom-verification-level).

>     - **`verifyTimestamp`**(*string*): An OPTIONAL property that specifies timestamp verification configuration. Supported values are `always` and `afterCertExpiry`. The default value is `always`, which means always verify timestamp countersignature. `afterCertExpiry` means only verify timestamp countersignature if at least one certificate in the signing certificate chain has expired at the time of verification.

Reviewer 3: As per [May 20 meeting notes](https://hackmd.io/_vrqBGAOSUC_VWvFzWruZw?view#May-20-2024), `verifyTimestamp` should be child of `signatureVerification` and peer of `level`.

    - **`level`**(*string*): A REQUIRED property that specifies the verification level, supported values are `strict` and `skip`. `strict` is the default value meaning timestamp countersignature verification is performed. `skip` means no timestamp countersignature verification is performed.
    - **`expiryRelaxed`**(*boolean*): OPTIONAL. When set to `true`, validate the timestamp certificate chain expiration against the time point been stamped. When not set or set to `false`, validate the timestamp certificate chain expiration against the time at verification.
  - **`trustStores`**(*map of trust-store-type -> array-of-named-stores*): REQUIRED map with `trust-store-type` as keys and corresponding `array of named trust stores` as values. Each named trust store contains the trusted root certificates against which signatures are verified. Currently supported `trust-store-type` are `ca`, `signingAuthority` and `tsa`. For example, when TSAs are specified, the format is `"tsa":[acme-tsa, wabbit-tsa]`.

>   - **`trustedIdentities`**(*map of trust-store-type -> array-of-trusted-identities*): REQUIRED map with `trust-store-type` as keys and corresponding `array of trusted identities` as values. Currently supported `trust-store-type` are `ca`, `signingAuthority` and `tsa`. For example, when a CA trusted identity is specified, the format is `"ca": ["x509.subject: C=US, ST=WA, L=Seattle, O=acme-rockets.io, OU=Finance, CN=SecureBuilder"]`. A value `*` is supported if user trusts any identity under a certain `trust-store-type`. For example, `"tsa": ["*"]`. A missing `trust-store-type` or empty array in the map means NO identity is trusted under the particular trust store type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **`trustedIdentities`**(*map of trust-store-type -> array-of-trusted-identities*): REQUIRED map with `trust-store-type` as keys and corresponding `array of trusted identities` as values. Please ensure specify the corresponding `trust-store-type` with its value if using the feature related to the type, or the operation MUST fail. Currently supported `trust-store-type` are `ca`, `signingAuthority` and `tsa`. For example, when a CA trusted identity is specified, the format is `"ca": ["x509.subject: C=US, ST=WA, L=Seattle, O=acme-rockets.io, OU=Finance, CN=SecureBuilder"]`. A value `*` is supported if user trusts any identity under a certain `trust-store-type`. For example, `"tsa": ["*"]`. A missing `trust-store-type` or empty array in the map means NO identity is trusted under the particular trust store type.
```

Reviewer: Got it. We can resolve it.

> A missing `trust-store-type` or empty array in the map means NO identity is trusted under the particular trust store type.

  - **`trustStores`**(*array of string*): This REQUIRED property specifies a set of one or more named trust stores, each of which contain the trusted roots against which signatures are verified. Each named trust store uses the format `{trust-store-type}:{named-store}`. Currently supported values for `trust-store-type` are `ca`, `signingAuthority` and `tsa`. When a TSA is used, the format `ca:acme-rockets,tsa:acme-tsa` is supported to specify it.
  - **`trustedIdentities`**(*array of strings*): This REQUIRED property specifies a set of identities that the user trusts. For X.509 PKI, it supports list of elements/attributes of the signing certificate's subject. For more information, see [identities constraints](#trusted-identities-constraints) section. A value `*` is supported if user trusts any identity (signing certificate) issued by the CA(s) in `trustStore`.

#### Signature Verification details

- Signature verification is a multi step process performs the following validations
  - integrity (artifact is unaltered, signature is not corrupted)
  - authenticity (the signature is really from the identity that claims to have signed it)

>   - trusted timestamping (the signature was generated when the certificate was unexpired)

Reviewer 4: Should we use `authentic timestamp` instead of `trusted timestamping` in order to be consistent with the following paragraph that uses `Authentic timestamp`

**Authenticity** : Guarantees that the artifact was signed by an identity trusted by the verifier. Its definition does not include revocation, which is when a trusted identity is subsequently untrusted because of a compromise.

> **Authentic timestamp** : Guarantees that the signature was generated on or before the time point been stamped. In the absence of an Authentic timestamp, a signature is considered invalid if the time of verification is outside the signing certificate or chain's validity period.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Authentic timestamp** : Guarantees that the signature was generated on or before the time point that has been stamped. In the absence of an Authentic timestamp, a signature is considered invalid if the time of verification is outside the signing certificate or chain's validity period.
```

**Authenticity** : Guarantees that the artifact was signed by an identity trusted by the verifier. Its definition does not include revocation, which is when a trusted identity is subsequently untrusted because of a compromise.

> **Authentic timestamp** : Guarantees that the signature was generated before the timestamp. In the absence of an Authentic timestamp, a signature is considered invalid if the time of verification is outside the signing certificate or chain's validity period.

Reviewer 3: Why have we dropped `It also allows a verifier to determine if a signature must be treated as valid or invalid based on whether the signature was generated before or after the certificate revocation.`?

We should use timestamp for revocation check

        1. Retrieve the timestamp's accuracy.
        If the accuracy is explicitly specified in `TSTInfo.accuracy`, use that value.
        If the accuracy is not explicitly specified and `TSTInfo.policy` is the baseline time-stamp policy([RFC-3628](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3628#section-5.2)), use accuracy of 1 second.
        Otherwise, use an accuracy of 0.
        1. Calculate the timestamp range using the lower and upper limits per [RFC-3161 section 2.4.2](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3161#section-2.4.2) and store the limits as `timeStampLowerLimit` and `timeStampUpperLimit` variables respectively.
    1. Validate that the time range from `timeStampLowerLimit` to `timeStampUpperLimit` is entirely within the signing certificate and certificate chain's validity period. If the validation passes, continue to the next step. Else fail this step.

    If under signing scheme [`notary.x509.signingAuthority`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509signingauthority):
    1. Check for the `Authentic Signing Time` signed attribute. If it does not exist, fail this step.
    1. Store the `Authentic Signing Time` in variables `timeStampLowerLimit` and `timeStampUpperLimit`.

>     1. Validate that the time range from `timeStampLowerLimit` to `timeStampUpperLimit` is entirely within the signing certificate and certificate chain's validity period. If the validation passes, continue to the next step. Else fail this step.

Reviewer 3: nit: this step can be combined for both signing schemes.

    }
```

#### Timestamp Countersignature Verification details

Sufficient and necessary conditions to trigger timestamp countersignature verification:
  - As the overall switch, `authenticTimestamp` under `signatureVerification` of trust policy is NOT marked as `skip`.
  - The signing scheme is [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509).
  - `tsa` trust store type is configured under `trustStores` field of the corresponding trust policy statement.
  - `verifyTimestamp` under `signatureVerification` of trust policy is not set or set to `always`; OR it's set to `afterCertExpiry` and at least one certificate in the signing certificate chain has expired at the time of verification.

See the flow chart below for a better understanding:

> ```mermaid

Reviewer 3: nit: flow chart is really big in size, can we restrict its size?

flowchart TD;
  A{Authentic timestamp};
  B{Signing scheme}; 
  C{`tsa` trust store configured};
  D{`verifyTimestamp`};
  E{Signing cert chain expired};
  R1[Trigger timestamp verification];
  R2[No timestamp verification];

  A --> |Not skip| B
  A --> |Skip| R2
  B --> |notary.x509| C
  B --> |notary.x509.signingAuthority| R2
  C --> |Yes| D
  C --> |No| R2
  D --> |Not set or `always`| R1
  D --> |`afterCertExpiry`| E
  E --> |Yes| R1
  E --> |No| R2
```   

Timestamp countersignature verification is a multi step process performs the following validations
  - existence (timestamp token is present in the signature envelope)
  - integrity (timestamp token is unaltered, countersignature is not corrupted)
  - authenticity (the timestamp token is really from the TSA that claims to have signed it)
  - revocation check (is the TSA still trusted at the time of verification)

 **Existence** : Guarantees that the timestamp token exists in the signature envelope. It is always enforced if timestamp countersignature verification is triggered.

>  **Integrity** : Guarantees that the timestamp token wasn't altered after it was signed, or the countersignature isn't corrupted. It is always enforced if timestamp countersignature verification is triggered.

Reviewer 5: I polished this paragraph a bit. How about:
```suggestion
 **Integrity** : Guarantees that the timestamp token hasn't been altered after being signed, or that the countersignature hasn't been corrupted. It is always enforced when timestamp countersignature verification is triggered.
```

>  **Authenticity** : Guarantees that the timestamp was issued by a trusted TSA identity. Its definition does not include revocation, which is when a trusted TSA is subsequently untrusted because of a compromise. It is always enforced when timestamp countersignature verification is triggered.

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this be governed by [authenticity](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/main/specs/trust-store-trust-policy.md#signature-verification-details) configuration in trust policy?

>  **Revocation check** : Guarantees that the TSA identity is still trusted at verification time. Events such as key or system compromise can cause a previously trusted TSA identity to become untrusted. It is always enforced when timestamp countersignature verification is triggered.

Reviewer 3: > **Revocation check** : Guarantees that the TSA identity is still trusted at verification time. Events such as key or system compromise can cause a previously trusted TSA identity to become untrusted. It is always enforced when timestamp countersignature verification is triggered.

Shouldn't this be governed by [revocation](https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/blob/main/specs/trust-store-trust-policy.md#signature-verification-details) configuration in trust policy ?

>  **Revocation check** : Guarantees that the TSA identity is still trusted at verification time. Events such as key or system compromise can make a TSA identity that was previously trusted, to be subsequently untrusted. It is always enforced if timestamp countersignature verification is triggered.

Reviewer 5: I polished this paragraph a bit. How about:
```suggestion
 **Revocation check** : Guarantees that the TSA identity is still trusted at verification time. Events such as key or system compromise can cause a previously trusted TSA identity to become untrusted. It is always enforced when timestamp countersignature verification is triggered.
```

**Authenticity** : Guarantees that the artifact was signed by an identity trusted by the verifier. Its definition does not include revocation, which is when a trusted identity is subsequently untrusted because of a compromise.

> **Authentic timestamp** : Guarantees that the signature was generated before the time point been stamped. In the absence of an Authentic timestamp, a signature is considered invalid if the time of verification is outside the signing certificate or chain's validity period.

Reviewer 2: We probably need a FAQ for **Authentic Timestamp** versus **Authentic Signing Time**.

    }
```

#### Timestamp Countersignature Verification details

 Sufficient and necessary conditions to trigger timestamp countersignature verification:
  - At least one certificate in the signing certificate chain has expired at the time of verification.
  - The signing scheme is [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509).
  - The unsigned attribute `Timestamp Signature` is present in the signature envelope.
  - The `authenticTimestamp` under `signatureVerification` of trust policy is NOT marked as `skip`.

>   - `level` under `timestampVerification` of trust policy is set to `strict` or `timestampVerification` is not present, default values are used in this case.

Reviewer 2: Do we have a table for levels for `timestampVerification`?

   
 Timestamp countersignature verification is a multi step process performs the following validations
  - integrity (timestamp token is unaltered, countersignature is not corrupted)
  - authenticity (the timestamp token is really from the TSA that claims to have signed it)
  - expiry (the timestamp certificate chain is unexpired at the time of verification)
  - revocation check (is the TSA still trusted at the time of verification)

 **Integrity** : Guarantees that the timestamp token wasn't altered after it was signed, or the countersignature isn't corrupted. It is always enforced if timestamp countersignature verification is performed.

 **Authenticity** : Guarantees that the timestamp was issued by a trusted TSA identity. Its definition does not include revocation, which is when a trusted TSA is subsequently untrusted because of a compromise. It is always enforced if timestamp countersignature verification is performed.

>  **Expiry** : Guarantees that the timestamp certificate chain is unexpired at the time of verification. It can be relaxed through the `expiryRelaxed` option under `timestampVerification` of the trust policy. When `expiryRelaxed` is set to `true`, the timestamp certificate chain expiry is checked against the time point been stamped. Otherwise, the timestamp certificate chain expiry is checked against the time at verification.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: When `expiryRelaxed` is set to `true`, the timestamp in the timestamp signature is trusted as the current time to verify the timestamp signature itself.

1. **Validate Expiry:**
    1. If an `expiry time` signed attribute is present in the signature envelope, check if the local machine’s current time(in UTC) is greater than `expiry time`. If yes, fail this step.

> 1. **Validate Trusted Timestamp:**

Reviewer: When should we perform timestamp countersignature verification? Should we verify it all the time or only when the signing leaf certificate has expired? Do we prefer one SignerInfo to be valid, or should all SignerInfos be valid? What are the limitations for the timestamp token? Do we need the timestamping certificates (leaf & intermediate) to be included in the token?

Reviewer: Thanks for your explanation. We can resolve the comment.

        1. Else validate if the X.509 subject (`x509.subject`) in the `trustedIdentities` list matches with the value of corresponding attributes in the signing certificate’s subject, refer [this section](#trusted-identities-constraints) for details. If a match is not found, fail this step.
1. **Validate Expiry:**
    1. If an `expiry time` signed attribute is present in the signature envelope, check if the local machine’s current time(in UTC) is greater than `expiry time`. If yes, fail this step.
1. **Validate Authentic Timestamp:**
    1. If under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509):

>         1. If [`sufficient and necessary conditions to trigger timestamp countersignature verification`](./trust-store-trust-policy.md/#timestamp-countersignature-verification-details) is satisfied, perform timestamp countersignature verification:

Reviewer 5: Nit
```suggestion
        1. If [`sufficient and necessary conditions to trigger timestamp countersignature verification`](./trust-store-trust-policy.md/#timestamp-countersignature-verification-details) are satisfied, perform timestamp countersignature verification:
```

            1. Validate that certificate and certificate-chain lead to a trusted certificate present in the named stores listed under the same `trust-store-type`.
            1. If all the certificates in the named stores under the same `trust-store-type` have been evaluated without a match, then fail this step.
        1. If `array-of-trusted-identities` listed under the same `trust-store-type` in `trustedIdentities` is `["*"]`, then skip to the next validation (Validate Expiry).
        1. Else validate if X.509 subjects (`x509.subject`) listed under the same `trust-store-type` in `trustedIdentities` matches with the value of corresponding attributes in the signing certificate’s subject, refer [this section](#trusted-identities-constraints) for details. If a match is not found, fail this step.
1. **Validate Expiry:**
    1. If an `expiry time` signed attribute is present in the signature envelope, check if the local machine’s current time(in UTC) is greater than `expiry time`. If yes, fail this step.
1. **Validate Authentic Timestamp:**

>     If under signing scheme [`notary.x509`](./signing-scheme.md/#notaryx509):

Reviewer 2: Can you make those `If`s itemized?

Reviewer 2: Otherwise, the step `6.i` is ambiguous.

>     1. Validate that the local machine's current time (in  UTC) is within the signing certificate chain's validity period. If the validation passes, continue to the next validation (Validate Revocation Status). Otherwise, continue to step 6.2.

Reviewer 2: If we use timestamp instead of datetime, we dont need to worry about time zones.

            Otherwise, use an accuracy of 0.
            1. Calculate the timestamp range using the lower and upper limits per [RFC 3161 section 2.4.2](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3161#section-2.4.2) and store the limits as `timeStampLowerLimit` and `timeStampUpperLimit` variables respectively.
            1. Validate that the time range from `timeStampLowerLimit` to `timeStampUpperLimit` is entirely within the signing certificate chain's validity period. If the validation passes, continue to the next validation (Validate Revocation Status). Else fail this step.

>         1. If step 6.1.1 is not performed. Validate that the local machine's current time (in  UTC) is within the signing certificate chain's validity period. If the validation passes, continue to the next validation (Validate Revocation Status). Else fail this step.

Reviewer 2: For `6.1.1`, do you mean `6.i.a`?
